
![](http://cyberthreatinfo.github.io/images/logs-beav.png){width="2.297222222222222in"
height="1.6222222222222222in"}

**5 Great Reasons to Centrally Store, Analyze, and Act on Event Logs**

I originally wrote a version of this a few years ago for my friends at
Auvik.

I’ve updated it as some things have changed but the core message is
still invaluable and frankly a concept missed by many organizations.

Whether you’re trying to troubleshoot a problem, defend against cyber
security attacks, or simply optimize your environment, event logs are
your best source of information. 

Moreover, *not* logging or ignoring your logs is like not checking your
blindspot when you’re changing lanes—sooner or later you’re going to
seriously regret it because the effects will be disastrous. The regret
will set in when you have an issue (attack or otherwise) you will simply
not know “what good looks like” you will be searching through logs and
every thing will require investigation because without a baseline you
have no clue what normal is “what good looks like”.

**Centralized logging** is where all your network/server elements send
data to a central server, it is far more advantageous than logging your
systems locally. With central logs, you have one complete view of your
environment. Here are 5 ways a centralized view makes you better,
faster, and more efficient at your job.

**1. Centralized logs are indispensable to troubleshooting**

Logs are indispensable when it comes to pinpointing problems and
determining their causes. They’ll let you identify issues based on hard
data, not guesswork.

During or after an incident, a logging tool such as ELK (Elastic,
Logstash, Kibana), Graylog, or Splunk with real-time graphing,
filtering, comparisons, and alarming can give you access to data
correlated from multiple sources across your systems, helping you narrow
down the incident cause.

You get a complete before-and-after picture of what happened, showing
the effects on *all* the systems in your environment from one interface.
In a locally logged environment, you’d need to go from system to system,
open multiple windows, and attempt to piece things together. That’s
time-consuming and you might miss critical correlations.

**2. Centralized logs help you proactively manage your network**

Once you’re collecting data, log review and analysis should become part
of your daily or weekly regimen, depending on the size of your
environment.

Constant analysis means you can be proactive instead of reactive,
nipping problems in the bud before they even occur. For example, if you
see memory or disk size creeping up or giving errors you can address the
issue *before* it causes failure.

There’s a huge difference between scheduled and unscheduled downtime
when it comes to maintaining user trust and keeping repair costs low, so
any proactive maintenance you can do is a big win.

**3. Centralized logs help you deliver greater value**

Once you’ve accumulated enough data, you can perform a lot of different
types of analysis on it to better understand your network and your
users. For example, you might complete a comparative analysis using
daily, monthly, or yearly data to identify changes that have occurred on
your network -- for the better or worse.

Trend analysis, whether day over day or year over year, can be used to
quickly find anomalies, such as a sudden spike in log frequency you will
have a baseline and know “what good looks like”. Once you’ve identified
the change, you can dig into why it happened and address it.

The business intelligence you extract from your analysis can be used to
find efficiencies, improve network/server design, and provide an overall
improved experience for the business.

**4. Centralized logs reduce the risk of losing data**

A centralized logging system removes the individual server from the
equation. If the server you’re trying to troubleshoot is down, local log
files won’t be accessible, rendering you blind. Centralized logging
(with proper system backups) ensures you always have a place to view the
logs and diagnose the issue.

**5. Centralized logs improve your network security**

By centrally logging user activity, you can analyze for activity trends
and notice any unusual behavior.

When a system is compromised you can no longer trust its logs.
Centralized logs give you the forensic ability to determine what
happened right before the compromise, including any user activity. This
data is instrumental in preventing a recurrence.

If a system is under a cyber-security attack via brute force, you’ll
quickly be able to see this in the logs. Even if the attack is spread
across multiple systems and requires a more subtle correlation, you can
still see the attack in the logs and respond to it. By comparison,
detecting a multi-system attack by looking at local logs would be
extremely difficult.

Whether log events point to issues with hardware, applications,
capacity, or security issues, they contain the data you need to quickly
find and solve problems that have a direct impact on business
operations. This ability to zero in on issues, be proactive, and react
intelligently is invaluable. Even discovering obscure edge cases that
occur periodically is often only possible by analyzing centralized log
data. The other invaluable result of having centralized logs with
history is baselining, it is next to impossible to troubleshoot an
issue, or search for an attacker if you don’t know what is normal i.e.
“what good looks like”.

In other words, a properly used centralized logging system is both
necessary and beneficial for any operation.

A little about the author Rod Lewis P.Eng. CISSP. Rod is a Business,
Technology, Operations, Security Leader and Advisor. To find out more
visit: [*theoknetwork*](http://www.theoknetwork,com) or
[*Linkedin.*](https://www.linkedin.com/in/rod-lewis-919b441/) This
article and more can be found at the recently launched
[*cyberthreat.info*](http://www.cyberthreat.info) blog.
